========,1,preface.
Jason Joseph Euell (born 6 February 1977) is a former footballer who is now the Under 21s coach at Charlton Athletic.
He played as either a forward or a midfielder.
He has also been capped three times by Jamaica.
He spent much of his career playing in the Premier League, with all but one season between 1995 and 2007 in the top flight — firstly with Wimbledon, where he spent six years, including one season in the First Division, then Charlton Athletic for five years, before a season with Middlesbrough.
He then dropped to the second tier of football in England, initially with Southampton, where he spent two years, before his move to Blackpool in 2009, where he was part of the team which won promotion to the Premier League.
In 2011, he rejoined Charlton Athletic – by now in League One – for a second spell and helped them win promotion to the Championship.
Later that season he was loaned to AFC Wimbledon, the successor to his first club.
========,2,Club career.
========,3,Wimbledon.
Born in Lambeth, London, Euell rose through the ranks at the Wimbledon youth academy.
After scoring on his debut in October 1995 against Southampton as an 18-year-old, he went on to make further a further eight Premier League appearances, and scored one more goal, in the 1995–96 season.
The following season he made a total of eight appearances, scoring two goals.
In 1997–98 he began playing more regularly, making a total of 23 appearances, scoring eight goals, including three goals in three FA Cup games.
He established himself as a regular first team player in the 1998–99 season, making a total of 43 appearances, including 33 in the league and scoring ten goals.
The following season he made a total of 45 appearances, scoring five goals.
However, "the Dons" finished in 18th place and so were relegated to the First Division.
He spent the 2000–01 season with Wimbledon in the First Division and scored 19 goals in 36 league games, his highest season tally of goals.
Euell made a total of 181 appearances, scoring 47 goals in six years with "the Dons".
========,3,Charlton Athletic.
In July 2001, Charlton Athletic signed him for a club record fee of £4.75 million, bringing him back to the Premier League.
He made his debut on 18 August in a 2–1 home defeat to Everton.
His first goal for the Addicks came in the third round of the League Cup on 9 October in a 1–0 win over West Bromwich Albion at the Hawthorns.
His first league goal came on 20 October in a 1–1 draw with Derby County at Pride Park.
On 19 November Euell scored a first half brace in a 4–4 home draw with West Ham United.
He scored both goals in a 2–1 home win over Chelsea on 2 March 2002.
In the 2001–02 season he made a total of 40 appearances, scoring 13 goals as the Addicks finished in 14th place in the Premier League.
In his first three seasons with the Addicks Euell was top scorer.
However, in the 2004–05 season he scored only twice.
In 2005–06, he missed much of the season with a shoulder injury, and then failed to get back into the first team, scoring only once all season, although he turned down a transfer to Birmingham City in January 2006.
In five years at the club Euell made a total of 155 appearances, scoring 37 goals.
========,3,Middlesbrough.
Euell joined Middlesbrough on 31 August 2006 for £300,000.
His first game in a Boro shirt was a 1–1 draw with Arsenal on 9 September 2006 at the Emirates Stadium.
Euell set up James Morrison to give Middlesbrough a 1–0 lead before Thierry Henry equalized.
However, his stay at the Riverside Stadium lasted just one season, during which he made a total of 20 appearances, but failing to score.
He started the 2007–08 season with Boro.
However, after not figuring in manager Gareth Southgate's plans, his contract with the club was cancelled in late August 2007.
========,3,Southampton.
On 31 August 2007 Euell moved to Championship club Southampton on a free transfer.
He made his Saints debut the following day as a 64th-minute substitute for Andrew Surman in a 3–0 win over Queens Park Rangers at Loftus Road.
His first goal came in his eighth Saints appearance, when he scored the second goal in a 3–2 win over Burnley at Turf Moor on 27 October.
He made a total of 41 appearances in the 2007–08 season scoring three goals, as the club finished just two points above the relegation places in 20th on 54 points.
In the 2008–09 season Euell made 24 appearances, scoring two goals, both of which came in a 3–0 win over Ipswich Town at Portman Road on 3 March 2009.
Southampton finished second bottom of the Championship in 23rd and were relegated to League One.
Euell made a total of 65 appearances in two seasons with "the Saints", scoring five goals.
========,3,Blackpool.
It was reported on 19 July 2009 that Euell was about to sign for Championship side Blackpool.
Two days later he signed a one-year contract with an option for a further twelve months with the Seasiders.
Of the move Euell said, "I had a meeting with Ian Holloway last week and it was a good, funny chat to discuss football as well as other things.
It swayed for me to want to be here and be part of what Ian's trying to achieve in moving the club forward and I want to be part of that."
On 8 August he made his debut, and captained the team, as "the Seasiders" started the 2009–10 season with a 1–1 draw with Queens Park Rangers at Loftus Road.
His first goal came in "the Seasiders" 2–1 win over Newcastle united at Bloomfield Road on 16 September.
During a League Cup match between Blackpool and Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium on 22 September, Euell, who at the time was sat on the substitutes bench, was racially abused by a Stoke fan, who was ejected from the stadium and subsequently arrested by Staffordshire Police, before being released pending inquiries.
Euell confronted the supporter that was taunting him.
Blackpool manager Ian Holloway, who had to restrain Euell, was furious in his post-match interview, saying: "We are human beings and Jason is a footballer.
The colour of his skin shouldn't matter.
It was disgusting.
The stewards believed what Jason said, got the bloke out and I hope he is banned for life.
(He is) an absolute disgrace of a human being.
I thought those days had gone.
Jason was just sat in the dugout at the time.
I saw his reaction and I had to calm him down.
It's absolutely disgraceful."
While Euell later said: "It did hurt.
I felt I had to stand up for all colours and creeds and show that we won't accept it.
I'm proud that I made a stand.
It was a shock to hear what came out of the guy's mouth.
Racism in football is not dead and buried but it's still a shock to hear that kind of thing in close proximity.
There were people near the idiot who didn't agree with it, but there were others who turned a blind eye, which was disappointing."
Euell received an official apology from Stoke City, who confirmed that they would "impose the toughest possible sanctions" on the supporter accused of racial abuse.
In the wake of the incident, Tottenham Hotspur manager Harry Redknapp called for fans who racially abuse players to be imprisoned, saying: "That is disgusting – there's no place for that in the game.
Surely we can't have that sort of behaviour now?
Anyone who does it should be put in prison – not banned from football.
Stick them where they belong, in the nut-house.
It's wrong."
On 5 October, a 47-year-old man was charged with a racially aggravated public order offence and bailed to appear in court in Stoke-on-Trent on 13 October, when the case was adjourned until 10 November.
On 25 November the fan, Robert Mason, said to suffer "from a schizo-affective disorder", admitted making a racist comment.
He was given a three-year order banning him from all football grounds in the United Kingdom and fined £170.
Euell was a 76th-minute substitute in Blackpool's debut Premier League match, a 4–0 win over Wigan Athletic at the DW Stadium on 14 August 2010.
Euell made two more Premier League appearances, against Aston Villa and Birmingham City, before falling down the pecking order.
Euell admitted he had become frustrated by his lack of action with the Seasiders and had already spoken to Ian Holloway about the possibility of a loan move.
He was released by Blackpool at end of the 2010–11 season
========,3,Doncaster Rovers loan.
After lack of first team appearance, He joined Doncaster Rovers on loan for a month from 18 February 2011, subject to clearance from the Premier League which later eventually remaining until the end of the season.
On 19 February 2012, Euell made his debut in a 3–0 loss against Swansea City.
He scored his first goal for Doncaster against Watford, equalising in a 1–1 draw on 26 February 2011.
On 25 April 2011, Euell scored a brace in a 2–2 draw against Barnsley Due to his good performance for Doncaster Rovers, Assistant manager Richard O'Kelly says the club keen to sign him permanently but however O'Kelly says it is 'too early' to discuss a permanent deal.
========,3,Charlton Athletic.
After being released by Blackpool, Euell made a surprise addition to the Charlton squad for their friendly against Woking after handed a 20-minute run-out as a substitute which the result was 0–0.
Then, Euell began training with former club Charlton Athletic with a view to a move back to The Valley, on 10 August 2011 he rejoined Charlton on a one-year deal having impressed while on trial.
After joining, Euell told the club's official website: "It feels good to be back and I'm happy that Chris Powell and the club have allowed me to come back to train and get fit.
It felt good to pull the Charlton shirt back on and to just play some football again."
Euell also stated he has made him more determined to succeed the 2011/12 season since being a free agent.
However, Euell had made just 10 substitute appearances in League One at Charlton.
On 13 August 2011, Euell re-made his debut for Charlton in a 2–1 win over Notts County.
Ten days after making his debut, Euell scored his first goal for the club since 15 April 2006 in the League Cup First Round in a 2–1 win over Reading which he scored the winner and send the club through to the next round.
Euell scored his second goal for the club since returning on 3 December in the FA Cup 2nd round against Carlisle.
Charlton won the game 2–0 with Euell scoring in the 90th minute.
In May 2012, Euell was released from Charlton after being told his contract would not be renewed, however he did take up a youth team coaching role at Charlton the following season.
========,3,AFC Wimbledon loan.
On 10 January 2012, it was announced that Euell had signed a five-week loan for League Two club AFC Wimbledon, eleven years after he left the original, now defunct Wimbledon.
Euell made his debut for AFC Wimbledon against Port Vale but suffered an ankle injury in the first half of his debut on 14 January 2012.
Despite suffered an ankle injury, Euell made his comeback from the problem against Northampton Town.
His good performance at Wimbledon led Euell has extended his loan spell at the club by another month.
========,2,International career.
Euell was capped by the England under-20 team.
He was in the squad for the 1997 FIFA World Youth Championship in Malaysia.
After being an unused substitute for England's opening game in Group F, a 2–1 victory over Côte d'Ivoire on 18 June, he made his debut two days later as a 64th minute replacement for Michael Owen in a 5–0 win over United Arab Emirates.
On 26 June he was an 81st-minute substitute in England's 2–1 Round of 16 defeat to Argentina.
Euell qualified to play for Jamaica as his father was born there.
And in July 2004, after attending a match between Jamaica and Haiti, Euell committed himself to play for the Jamaican national team, saying, "The last few weeks have really made me want to play for Jamaica.
There is a World Cup to play for and it would just be amazing to be part of a tournament like that."
He went on to make a total of three appearances for Jamaica, scoring one goal, from 2004 to 2006.
========,2,Personal life.
Euell is deaf in his right ear.
Talking about this in 2006, he said, "It's never been an issue for me in terms of my football although, socially, it can occasionally have a bit of an impact.
I think I tend to be a bit more aware of what's going on around me on the football pitch because I am deaf in one ear.
Maybe that's led to some of my other senses becoming heightened a bit.
It hasn't stopped me from doing anything at all on the football pitch.
It didn't stop me developing as a youngster and I'm sure it won't stop me continuing to develop in the future."
In September 2010 Euell became an ambassador for Kick It Out, saying: "If people can see that there are organisations out there, like Kick It Out, that can raise awareness of what needs to be done to stop racism up and down the country it will only help eradicate it from daily life.
Football is a major sport in this country, so it's a good association to try and help but communities also play an important role."
Euell is also an honorary patron of the Show Racism the Red Card organisation.
Euell is also an ambassador for the National Deaf Awareness In Sport Alliance project.
