========,1,preface.
State Route 204 (SR 204) is a state highway in the east-central part of the U.S. state of Georgia.
It runs from a point east of Pembroke and ends in Downtown Savannah.
Its routing is located within portions of Bryan and Chatham counties.
========,2,Route description.
SR 204 begins at an intersection with US 280/SR 30.
It heads east through Ellabell, Georgia.
It curves to the southeast and parallels the northeastern part of Fort Stewart.
It has an interchange with Interstate 95 (I-95), followed by an intersection with US 17/SR 25 (Ocean Highway), and an interchange with the Veterans Parkway (also known as the Southwest Bypass), southwest of Savannah.
It curves to the northeast and meets SR 204 Spur (Montgomery Cross Road).
It then continues northeast to an intersection with SR 21 (DeRenne Avenue), which leads to I-516.
Then, it meets US 80/SR 26 (Victory Drive).
A short distance later, it turns left onto 37th Street, and follows that until it meets its eastern terminus, an interchange with I-16/US 17.
The highway is two lanes as it travels east through rural Bryan County and the Ellabell community.
Once it crosses the Ogeechee River and enters Chatham County, the highway becomes known as Fort Argyle Road.
Development is more noticeable as one travels east, and there is a large collection of businesses catering to travelers at the interchange with I-95.
It is at this interchange that the highway changes from two lanes to four divided lanes.
Traffic is often quite heavy as SR 204 is the major route from I-95 into the busy south side of Savannah.
Though SR 204 is known as Abercorn Expressway as it enters Savannah, it is not a freeway.
While there are grade separated interchanges with both US 17/SR 25 and Veterans Parkway, there are at-grade signalized intersections at Grove Point Road and King George Boulevard, which can cause traffic delays, especially due to the timing at the King George Boulevard signal.
The speed limit is .
At the intersection with Rio Road, adjacent to the Savannah Mall, the highway becomes six lanes divided and remains as such until the intersection with DeRenne Avenue, where it becomes four lanes as it enters historic residential areas.
SR 204 continues to follow Abercorn Street north for several blocks to its intersection with 37th Street.
Here, it turns left and follows 37th Street, a four lane divided surface arterial, west for a number of blocks.
Just west of its intersection with Bulloch Street, SR 204 bears right to follow the short 37th Street Connector, which leads to I-16/US 17, and thus the end of State Route 204.
========,2,Related route.
State Route 204 Spur (SR 204 Spur) is a connecting Spur route to Skidaway Island.
It also serves as the temporary southern terminus of the Harry S. Truman Parkway.
Segments of SR 204 Spur are named East Montgomery Cross Road, Waters Avenue, Whitfield Avenue, Diamond Causeway, and Tidewater Way.
SR 204 Spur is not part of the National Highway System, a system of roadways important to the nation's economy, defense, and mobility.
