========,1,preface.
Adel Taarabt ( / Tamaziǧt: Adil Tǎrabt– born 24 May 1989) is a Moroccan professional footballer who plays for Italian club Genoa, on loan from Portuguese club Benfica, and the Morocco national team as an attacking midfielder.
He can also play as a winger.
He began his playing career in France at Lens before moving to English Premier League team Tottenham Hotspur in 2007.
Taarabt then moved to Queens Park Rangers on loan in July 2009.
He was signed permanently in August 2010 and quickly established himself at Loftus Road.
QPR were relegated in 2013, and in the ensuing summer Taarabt moved to Fulham on loan.
After another loan to AC Milan, Taarabt eventually signed a long term deal with Portuguese side Benfica.
Taarabt made his Morocco debut in February 2009, and scored his first international goal the following month.
He represented the country at the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations.
========,2,Club career.
========,3,Early career.
Taarabt was born in Fes, Morocco.
At a young age, his family moved to a small town called Berre-l'Étang, Bouches-du-Rhône, France.
He began his career at Lens in 2004, and played 14 games for RC Lens B in the Championnat de France amateur.
He made one first team appearance for Lens during the 2006–07 season.
========,3,Tottenham Hotspur.
Taarabt signed for Tottenham Hotspur on a long-term loan on 2 January 2007 after the club offered to integrate him quickly into the first team to offer him maximum playing time.
Within two months he made his first senior appearance in a Tottenham shirt, entering as an 87th-minute substitute for Pascal Chimbonda against local rivals West Ham United, in a 4–3 away victory on 4 March.
On 7 April, he made the only other appearance of his loan, in a 1–0 defeat at another local rival, Chelsea; he replaced Teemu Tainio after 64 minutes.
Tottenham signed Taarabt permanently on 8 June.
He scored his first goal for Spurs in a pre-season friendly against Stevenage Borough on 7 July.
He made his first of six appearances in the 2007–08 season against Derby County in the 4–0 win on 18 August, entering the 71st minute for Wayne Routledge.
At the beginning of the 2008–09 season, Taarabt was among a group of players not given a squad number by then manager Juande Ramos, and also banned from the first-team training ground.
He was given his old number when Harry Redknapp took over team management, but his only league appearance that season came in a goalless North London derby on 8 February 2009, playing three minutes in place of Aaron Lennon.
========,3,Queens Park Rangers.
On 13 March 2009, he joined Championship team Queens Park Rangers on loan until the end of the season.
He scored his first goal for QPR in a 2–1 win over Bristol City.
His loan spell was cut short after he suffered a knee injury which required surgery.
Taarabt rejoined QPR on a season-long loan for the 2009–10 season on 23 July 2009.
On 1 October, Taarabt scored a "wonder strike" in a match against Preston North End.
He collected the ball on his chest inside the QPR half, dribbled 20 yards past three players and curled in a shot from 25 yards.
This led Jim Magilton to label Taarabt as a "genius" and the goal is seen as one of the Championship's finest.
Tottenham confirmed in October 2009 that Taarabt could stay at QPR for the season providing that a Premier League club did not make a bid for him in the January transfer window.
QPR were unable to make the transfer a permanent one because they could not afford the £4.5 million valuation placed on Taarabt by Spurs.
In March 2010, Taarabt was quoted in an interview as being sorry that he signed for Tottenham.
He had said "The big mistake was to sign for Tottenham and not go to another club when I first came over".
He stated that he wished he had signed for Arsenal instead but had opted for Spurs after Damien Comolli moved from being a scout at Arsenal to director of football at Spurs.
He stated that he felt he would have been given more chances to play at Arsenal and was advised at the time not to sign for Spurs by his friends Armand Traore and Abou Diaby, who play for Arsenal.
Taarabt went on to state his intention to sign for one of the top clubs in Spain "I hope to be playing for one of the top four in Spain next season – Real Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia or Sevilla.
I have contact with good teams and I know that they want me.
Now I just have to hope they can agree a deal with Tottenham."
On 5 August 2010, QPR signed Taarabt to a permanent deal for an undisclosed fee.
The Moroccan agreed a three-year deal with the central London club.
In January 2011, Taarabt was interviewed by the "Evening Standard", in which he stated: "The man who took me to Tottenham was Damien Comolli.
He was at Arsenal then.
But, when I was going to go to Arsenal, he moved to Tottenham.
He told me: 'Come to Tottenham.
We want to do like they do at Arsenal and take the best young players in the world.
You're going to have a better chance there.'
I believed him.
This was a mistake and I regret it.
Tottenham tried to do it like Arsenal but it's a different culture.
I would have had a better chance at Arsenal.
I would progress with Arsène Wenger.
He is a legend in France, one of the best managers in the world".
========,4,2010–11 season.
Adel Taarabt was to make his debut as a full Queens Park Rangers player as the club signed the Moroccan for a reported £1,000,000.
The contract with Queens Park Rangers provides for Tottenham to receive 40% of future transfer profit, in addition to the payments already made.
This was proved to be one of the bargains of the season as Taarabt went on to score 19 goals in 44 league appearances that season for the West London club.
With his unpredictable skill and reputation for never giving the opposition defence an easy 90 minutes, Taarabt went on to win the Championship Player of The Year award and gained a place in the Championship's best XI (also featuring teammate Paddy Kenny).
In March 2011, Taarabt missed two matches when he returned to France for family matters as one of his cousins had tragically been killed by Algerians.
In the international match Morocco vs Algeria he picked up a booking and was lucky not to be sent off.
In the return fixture Morocco manager Erik Gerets decided to drop Taarabt to the bench.
Taarabt decided to not turn up to the international fixture and vowed to never play for his country again.
However, several months later Taarabt wanted to play for Morocco again which Gerets reluctantly allowed but said that if Taarabt acted irrationally again he would not play for his country whilst he was in charge.
Some notable moments during the season were against Cardiff City (away, 2–2 draw) where Taarabt picked up a brace, scoring a wonder goal in the process.
During the home game against the same opposition, Taarabt scored the winner which took QPR back to the top of the Championship.
========,4,2011–12 season.
The 2011–12 season marked Taarabt's first real foray into the Premier League, for although having been featured in English football's highest tier as a Tottenham Hotspur player, he had never made a breakthrough into the Spurs first eleven.
The start of the season held much optimism for both QPR and Taarabt, yet this soon gave way to speculation that he would move away, and his name was associated with the likes of PSG and Napoli.
This was coupled with the arrival of Joey Barton in the August transfer window, who was immediately installed as captain at the expense of Taarabt.
These factors had the unfortunate effect of unsettling the player and he was unable to recreate his form from the previous season.
By early November he had taken over 20 shots and none of these had resulted in a goal.
Prior to this he had often let his temper get the better of him.
During the 6–0 loss away to Fulham on 2 October he was substituted at half time, which apparently led to an argument with manager Neil Warnock.
This attitude provoked criticism from his teammates, with Joey Barton being particularly vocal.
Taraabt was again substituted at half-time for a poor showing in the 3–1 defeat at Tottenham Hotspur and was subsequently left out of the side for the games against Manchester City and Stoke City.
During this period continued speculation linked him with PSG, and Warnock even admitted he would gladly accept an offer for Taraabt if the right offer came along.
Taraabt went on international duty and also had some minor injuries which also saw him left out of the side at this stage.
Warnock was highly critical of the player's agents during this period and laid much of the blame for him being unsettled at their feet.
He advised him to rethink the advice they had given him and stated "They won't make him better and I think it is a shame.
Adel can always make money but he is better than that.
I will be sad if he ends up going to make some money because I think he has great ability."
Still left out of the side throughout most of November, subsequent injuries to his teammates saw a recall, however, and he was commended for his performance in the 2–0 loss to Manchester United on 18 December.
He sustained this level of improved performance against Sunderland and Swansea City.
On 31 March, Taarabt scored the first goal in Queens Park Rangers's victory over Arsenal, and was also voted Man of the Match.
Taarabt followed up his goal against Arsenal by scoring a long-range free kick – the winning goal in a victory over his former club Tottenham on 21 April.
He was also shown his first red card in English football in the same game for a second bookable offence.
========,4,2012–13 season.
On 11 July 2012, Taarabt signed a new three-year contract with QPR, keeping him at the club until June 2016.
On 1 October 2012, Taarabt scored his first goal of the season against West Ham United with a dipping long-range shot after dribbling past two players.
He scored his second goal in three games with an emphatic volley away against West Bromwich Albion on 6 October, only five days later.
On 15 December, he scored both goals in QPR's first victory of the 2012–13 season, a 2–1 win over West London rivals, Fulham, the second with a mazy dribble ending with a finish on the outside of his foot.
Manager Harry Redknapp praised Taarabt by stating, "It was one of the all-time great performances, I felt."
Then on 2 January 2013 in QPR's second win of the season, a 1–0 away victory over rivals Chelsea, Taarabt was played in an unfamiliar striker position gaining the Man of the Match award and assisting the only goal – described as "Pelé-esque".
========,3,Fulham (loan).
Taarabt joined Premier League side Fulham on a season-long loan on 7 August 2013.
He made his Fulham debut in an away match against Sunderland where he played the full 90 minutes.
He scored his first goal for the club against Burton Albion in the League Cup on 27 August 2013.
========,3,Milan (loan).
On 30 January 2014, Taarabt signed for Milan until the end of the season, demonstrating the Rossoneri's renewed ambition on the transfer market.
He scored his first goal for AC Milan 8 minutes into his debut against Napoli, having tackled the ball in his own half and dribbling halfway across the pitch to score from outside the box in a 3–1 loss to Napoli.
On 19 February, he made his debut in the Champions League in the first leg of the round of 16 in a 0–1 loss at the San Siro against Atlético Madrid.
========,3,Return to Queens Park Rangers.
In the 2014 summer season, Taarabt returned from his loan spells back to QPR, but after starting in the League Cup game against Burton on 27 August, only came on as a substitute in the away game against West Ham.
Responding to a journalist's question, 67-year-old QPR manager Harry Redknapp, stated after his team's home defeat against Liverpool, "Taarabt is not injured.
He's not fit.
He's not fit to play football unfortunately.
He played in a reserve game the other day and I could have run about more than he did.
I can't pick him."
Taarabt responded that the manager is "making excuses because QPR are losing games," adding, "maybe he expects me to make more tackles.
I am not this type of player."
========,3,Benfica.
On 12 June 2015, Taarabt signed a five-year contract with Portuguese champions Benfica.
On 10 January 2017, Taarabt joined Italian club Genoa on a loan deal.
========,2,International career.
Taarabt represented France at under-16, under-17 and under-18 levels, but opted to play for Morocco, saying "I felt the time was right when I was given this opportunity".
On 11 February 2009 Taarabt played his first international match with Morocco in a friendly against Czech Republic in Casablanca.
He also made an appearance on 29 March during Morocco's 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifier 2–1 defeat against Gabon.
Taarabt scored his first international goal on his first start on 31 March 2009 in a friendly 2–0 victory over Angola.
On 6 September 2009 he scored his first goal in a competitive international match against Togo in the 2010 World Cup qualification after he broke through the opposing defence in stoppage time.
On 3 June 2011, Taarabt decided to end his international career the day after being dropped to the bench for an Africa Cup of Nations qualifier against Algeria.
He reneged on that decision, returning on 9 October 2011 for their last qualifier against Tanzania.
Taarabt scored a free-kick that would end up being the winning goal and sealing Morocco's qualification.
He made two substitute appearances in a group stage exit.
On 26 December 2012, Taarabt was left out of Morocco's squad for the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations by coach Rachid Taoussi.
========,2,Personal life.
Taarabt is a Muslim and stated in an interview in June 2010 that this religion has had a significant impact on his life as a footballer:
"Being a Muslim has had a big impact on my professional life.
As Muslims, we don't drink alcohol, we don't smoke, so essentially we've become healthier, more professional footballers because of our lifestyle.
Before every game, I perform salat.
Without it, I just don't feel confident.
I make sure I pray after a match, too – to give thanks and be grateful for the stamina and strength God graced me with."
Taarabt credits his parents with keeping his religion in his life and his father for encouraging him to play professional football.
His parents are natives of the Rif region, near Taza.
